# Gencode - CLS Master Table
Here we specifically report on the results of the GENCODE pipeline to produce a collection of full length high quality transcripts. 

<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
<details>
  <summary>Table of Contents</summary>
  <ul>
    <li><a href="#background">Background</a></li>
    <li><a href="#data">Data</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#tables">Tables</a></li>
        <li><a href="#supplementary-data">Supplementary Data</a></li>
        <li><a href="#enhanced-annotation">Enhanced Annotation</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li><a href="#attributes-specifics">Attributes specifics</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#samples-metadata">Samples Metadata</a></li>
        <li><a href="#tissue-codes">Tissue Codes</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li><a href="#quickstart">Quickstart</a></il>
  </ul>
</details>

## Background
We employed [CLS](https://link.springer.com/protocol/10.1007/978-1-0716-1158-6_9) to target genomic regions with apparently weak, but potentially relevant, transcriptional activity. These include, among others, regions predicted to encode lncRNAs, enhancers, precursors of small RNAs, RNAs predicted to contain structural motifs, host non-coding GWAS hits or regions showing evolutionary characteristics of protein coding gene, or that are evolutionary conserved. Probes were designed in the human genome (assembly version hg38) using gencode v27 as reference annotation, and in mouse (assembly version mm10) with gencode vM16 annotation, finally RNA has been captured in multiple matched adult and embryonic tissues in both organisms. All long RNAseq reads have been processed using [LyRic](https://github.com/guigolab/LyRic), employing short read RNAseq data to support long reads derived transcript models.

## Data
### Tables

- Human
  - [Feature Table](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/latest/download/Hv3_masterTable.gtf.gz)
  - [Unique Intron Chain Table](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/latest/download/Hv3_splicedmasterTable_ICs.gtf.gz)
  - [Metadata](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/latest/download/Hv3_metadata.tsv.gz)
  
- Mouse
  - [Feature Table](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/latest/download/Mv2_masterTable.gtf.gz)
  - [Unique Intron Chain Table](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/latest/download/Mv2_splicedmasterTable_ICs.gtf.gz)
  - [Metadata](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/latest/download/Mv2_metadata.tsv.gz)

### Supplementary Tables

- Human
  - [Transcript Models Sequences](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/download/Supplementary/Hv3_masterTable.fa.gz)
  - [Mitocondrial Transcript Models]() (coming soon)
  - [SIRVs and ERCC Tables]() (coming soon)
  
- Mouse
  - [Transcript Models Sequences](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/download/Supplementary/Mv2_masterTable.fa.gz)
  - [Mitocondrial Transcript Models]() (coming soon)
  - [SIRVs and ERCC Tables]() (coming soon)

### Enhanced Annotation
The enhanced annotation has been obtained by merging, for each species, the latest annotation provided by Gencode with the features collected with our procedure.

- Human [v42](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/download/EnhancedAnnotation/Hv3_enhancedCLS3+gencodev42.loci.refmerged.gff.gz) , [v27](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/download/EnhancedAnnotation/Hv3_enhancedCLS3+gencodev27.loci.refmerged.gff.gz)
- Mouse [vM16](https://github.com/guigolab/gencode-cls-master-table/releases/download/EnhancedAnnotation/Mv2_enhancedCLS3+gencodevM16.loci.refmerged.gff.gz) , [vM31]()(coming soon)

## Attributes specifics
Each feature in the table is associated to a gene_id and transcript_id attributes, specifying the unique identifier as generated by LyRic.
The `transcript` features are additionally endowed with the following attributes:
||||
|-|-|-|
1 | target | comma-separated list of the genomic regions targeted by the pipeline. For each target we report, in order, the *source database*, the *identifier*, the *chromosome*, *start* and *end* coordinates, and the *strand*.
2 | endSupport | a value among **polyAOnlySupported**, **cageOnlySupported**, **cagePolyASupported**, **noCageNoPolyASupported**, indicating the type of support available for the transcript model.
3 | spliced | either **spliced** or **unspliced**, indicating whether the associated transcript model is composed of different exons or remains unspliced.
4 | refCompare | result of gffcompare against Gencode annotation *v24* for human and *vM7* for mouse. The original codes have been further collapsed to obtain the following categories: **Antisense** (corresponding gffcompare codes s, x), **Equal** (=), **Extends** (k), **Included** (c), **Intergenic** (y, p, u), **Intronic** (i), **Overlaps** (j, e, m, o, n).
5 | currentCompare | result of gffcompare against Gencode annotation *v41* for human and *vM30* for mouse, same categories as above. 
6 | sampleN | integer value indicating the number of transcripts across all samples merged into the respective transcript model
7 | samplesMetadata | a list of mnemotechnics samples IDs the collapsed transcripts were encountered in. See [Samples Metadata](#samples-metadata)
8 | expression | decimal value corresponding to the expression level of the transcript, expressed as RPM. The order of the values matches the order of the samples the transcript belongs to in the previous tag.

### Samples Metadata
The samples IDs have been generated in a way to keep track of as many metadata as possible. The names are composed as follows:
||||
|-|-|-|
0 | Fixed prefix | SID
1 | Single letter code for the organism | `H` (human), `M` (mouse)
2 | Two letter code indicating the tissue | See [Tissue codes](#tissue-codes)
3 | Single letter code for the stage | `A` (adult), `E` (embryo), `P` (placenta)
4 | Single letter code for the sequencing technology | `O` (ont), `P` (PacBio)
5 | Single letter code for capture status | `P` (pre-capture), `C` (post-capture)
6 | Two digit code for the biological replicate | - 
7 | Two digit code for the technical replicate | - 

### Tissue Codes
|||
|-|-|
Brain | `Br`
Heart | `He`
Liver | `Li`
WBCs | `Wb`
ESC | `Wb`
iPSC | `Wb`
Testis | `Te`
Placenta | `Pl`
Tpool | `Tp`
Cpool | `Cp`

Some examples of aliases and their meaning
 * `SIDMBrEPP0101`: mouse brain embryo PacBio pre-capture biologicalReplicate01 technicalReplicate01
 * `SIDHWbAOC0103`: human whiteBlood adult ont post-capture biologicalReplicate01 technicalReplicate03
 * `SIDHPlPPP0202`: human placenta placenta PacBio pre-capture biologicalReplicate02 technicalReplicate02


## Quickstart
The following script is readily available to [extract the tags](https://github.com/abreschi/utils/blob/master/extract.gtf.tags.sh) from the GTF file.
